   Double Precision           Version 1.0                  December-1993



                          Installation guide
                    for the GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS
                         model implementations

                               Per Ling
                  Institute of Information Processing
                      University of Umea, Sweden

                            December 15, 1993



   1. Introduction

   The purpose of this guide is to facilitate installation of the
   GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS model implementations [5],[6],[7] so that
   correct results are produced and high and uniform performance is
   achieved. The model implementations are primarily intended for single
   processor use, on machines with local or global caches, and for micro
   processors with on-chip caches. They can also be parallelized using
   a parallelizing compiler, or linked with underlying parallel BLAS
   routines. The compiler and processor dependent parts of the programs
   are concentrated in calls to underlying routines. These are the
   Level 3 BLAS routine DGEMM for general matrix multiply and add
   operations and some Level 1 and Level 2 BLAS routines. All GEMM-Based
   Level 3 BLAS routines are structured to reduce data traffic in the
   memory hierarchy.


   2. Auxiliary routines

   The original Fortran 77 model implementations of the Level-3 BLAS
   [1],[2] include two auxiliary subprograms, LSAME and XERBLA. The
   GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS model implementations have two additional
   auxiliary subprograms, DBIGP and DCLD.

   o  DBIGP determines which of two alternative code sections, in a
      GEMM-Based Level 3 routine, that will be the fastest for a
      particular problem configuration.

   o  DCLD determines whether the size of the leading dimension of a
      2-dimensional array is appropriate for the target memory
      hierarchy. A ``critical'' size of the leading dimension may cause
      a substantial increase in the amount of data movements in the
      memory hierarchy, resulting in severe performance degradation.
      Particularly, this may happen if the array is referenced by row.

   DCLD is designed for a multi-way associative cache in this
   implementation. DBIGP looks at only one of the dimensions of a
   problem to determine the fastest code section. It may be rewarding to
   rewrite DCLD for a machine with different cache policy, and DBIGP to
   involve both of the dimensions.

   The model implementations of the GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS assumes that
   arbitrary locations in the cache memory can be accessed in constant
   time. It is also assumed that references by column, to the main
   memory, generally are faster than references by row.


   3. User specified parameters

   Each of the GEMM-Based routines has system dependent parameters
   which are assigned values at compile time. These values are given in
   PARAMETER statements, by the user or by the system manager. A simple
   program DSGPM that facilitates tuning of the parameters is enclosed.
   DSGPM reads an input file with new PARAMETER statements, and re-
   writes the GEMM-Based routines replacing old PARAMETER statements
   with the new ones. The parameters specify internal block sizes, cache
   characteristics, and intersection points for alternative code
   sections in the GEMM-Based routines.

   The block dimensions RCB, RB, and CB specified in the Level 3
   routines have the following interpretation.

      RCB    - Dimension of a square matrix block.

      RB     - Number of rows in a rectangular matrix block.

      CB     - Number of columns in a rectangular block (RB*CB) and
               dimension of a square matrix block (CB*CB).

   The intersection points DIPx, where x is a number identifying a
   specific break point in a particular GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS routine,
   are specified in DBIGP. These intersection points are used to
   determine which of two alternative code sections that will be the
   fastest, depending on the size of a problem.

      DIPx   - Break point value for a selected matrix dimension. If the
               selected matrix dimension for a problem is smaller than
               DIPx, then DBIGP returns .FALSE., and the problem is
               executed in the first alternative code section.
               Otherwise, if the dimension is larger than, or equal to,
               DIPx, DBIGP returns .TRUE., and the problem executes in
               the second code section.

   DCLD has parameters specifying characteristics of the cache memory
   to determine which sizes of the leading dimension of a 2-dimensional
   array that should be considered critical. The cache lines in a
   multi-way associative cache are divided among a number of partitions,
   each containing the same number of lines. The number of lines in a
   partition equals the associativity of the cache. For example, in a
   four way associative cache, each partition contains four cache lines.

      LNSZ   - Size of a cache line in number of bytes.

      NPRT   - Number of partitions in the cache memory.

      PRTSZ  - The largest number of cache lines in each partition, that
               can be used exclusively to hold a local array containing
               a matrix block, during the execution of a GEMM-Based
               Level 3 routine. The remaining cache lines may be
               occupied by scalars, vectors and possibly program code,
               depending on properties of the system.

      LOLIM  - leading dimensions smaller than or equal to LOLIM are not
               regarded as critical.

      DP     - Size of a double-precision word in number of bytes.


   4. Level 3 BLAS performance from the Level 2 BLAS

   This section describes a required property of the underlying Level 2
   BLAS routines [3],[4] in order to get uniformly high performance from
   the GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS model implementations. The underlying
   Level 2 BLAS routines DGEMV, DSYR, DTRMV, and DTRSV perform matrix-
   vector operations involving a single matrix. For example, the routine
   DGEMV performs the matrix-vector multiply operation:

      y := alpha*A*x + beta*y,

   where alpha and beta are scalars, x and y are vectors, and A is a
   general matrix. Typically, one of the vectors x and y will be
   referenced repeatedly during a call, depending on whether the
   operation A*x is performed as multiple dot-products or as multiple
   axpy-products. For dot-products, the vector x is referenced
   repeatedly, once for each row of A. Sections of x may be kept in
   processor registers to provide for efficient register reuse. It may
   also be possible to reuse a large portion of x in the cache memory.
   We refer to this approach as register reuse using the cache memory as
   registers, rather than ``true'' cache reuse. True cache reuse is
   usually not associated with the Level 2 BLAS since elements of the
   involved matrix are referenced only once, and true cache reuse
   requires multiple references of a matrix. However, for multiple calls
   to a Level 2 BLAS routine it is possible to attain true cache reuse,
   under certain conditions. If DGEMV, for instance, is called
   repeatedly with different x and y vectors each time but with the same
   matrix A, then it is possible to reuse A provided that A fits
   properly in the cache and remains there between the calls. Notice
   that this technique does not prevent from further reuse of x or y in
   registers. Except for the overhead arising from multiple calls to the
   Level 2 BLAS routines (parameter checking etc.), this technique for
   cache reuse makes it possible to attain performance levels generally
   associated with the Level 3 BLAS. The GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS model
   implementations rely extensively on this technique for the Level 2
   computations, performed on blocks of matrices. Therefore, it is
   necessary for the underlying Level 2 BLAS routines to allow the
   matrix to be stored in the cache memory over multiple calls, in order
   to get high performance.

   On machines that allow programmers to have explicit control over
   which data resides in the cache, it is possible to implement Level 2
   BLAS routines that explicitly reuses a large section of x or y in the
   cache. This is likely to be a good approach for conventional use of
   the Level 2 BLAS, but prevents from true cache reuse over multiple
   calls, as utilized in the GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS model
   implementations. Obviously, if DGEMV is implemented to explicitly
   fill the cache with a large section of x, we cannot reuse A in the
   cache over multiple calls. On machines with a virtual memory system
   that fully controls the cache and causes the most recently referenced
   data to always reside in the cache, this problem does not occur.


   5. Guidelines for assigning values to the user specified parameters

   The performance of the GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS model implementations
   depend highly on the performance of the underlying BLAS routines, and
   of values assigned to the user specified parameters. The underlying
   BLAS routines are the Level 3 routine DGEMM, the Level 2 routines
   DGEMV, DSYR, DTRMV, and DTRSV, and the Level 1 routines DAXPY, DCOPY,
   and DSCAL. Memory hierarchies are often quite complex systems, with
   different peculiarities that may affect the performance. The user
   specified parameters for the GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS provide means
   for adjustment to some of the intricacies of a memory hierarchy.
   Considering the diversity of memory systems, the following guidelines
   for assigning values to the user specified parameters must be
   viewed as rules of thumb, rather than regulations.

   o  The block dimensions RCB, RB, and CB, should all be multiples of
      the number of double-precision words that fits in a cache line
      (LNSZ/DP).

   o  The three items that follow apply only to DSYRK, DTRMM, and
      DTRSM.

      -   If the machine has vector registers, RB should equal the
          number of double-precision words that goes into a vector
          register.

      -   A block of size (RB*CB) double-precision words should safely
          fit in the local cache memory, possibly together with scalars,
          two column vectors, of size RB and CB, and program code. RB*CB
          double-precision words may, for instance, constitute half or
          three quarters of the size of a local cache.

      -   A block of size (RCB*RCB) double-precision words should safely
          fit in cache and occupy, for instance, half or three quarters
          of a local cache.

   o  The following two items apply only to DSYMM and DSYR2K.

      -   A local array of size (RCB*RCB) will be allocated. The array
          does not need to fit in cache and should be fairly large but
          still reasonable in size. If vector registers are present, a
          good choice for RCB may be the number of words that fit in a
          vector register, or possibly a multiple of that number.

      -   In some cases, rows of length CB are referenced. CB cache
          lines should safely fit in the cache in order to become reused
          efficiently. RCB constitutes an upper limit for CB in this
          case. If CB is larger than RCB, RCB is used instead of CB.

   o  Local arrays of size (RCB*RCB) double precision words are
      allocated in each of the GEMM-Based routines to hold general,
      symmetric, or triangular matrix blocks temporarily. Further, a
      local array of size (RB*CB) is allocated in each of DSYRK, DTRMM,
      and DTRSM, and a local array of size (CB*CB) in DTRMM and DTRSM.

   o  The intersection points DIPx used in DSYRK, DTRMM, and DTRSM, are
      assigned values in the routine DBIGP. They provide means for
      chosing between two alternative code sections that perform the
      same operation but have different performance characteristics.
      Often, the choice is between a code section that calls the Level 2
      BLAS routine DGEMV and a code section that calls some other
      Level 2 BLAS routine. If the crucial dimension of the problem is
      larger than or equal to DIPx, then DGEMV is invoked. The block
      sizes may differ between the alternative code sections depending
      on the values of RCB, RB, and CB. Proper values for DIPx depend
      highly on the performance of the underlying Level 2 BLAS routines.
      Values returned from DBIGP should effectively reflect the
      performance characteristics of the underlying BLAS routines. If
      DGEMV is carefully optimized, a proper value for DIPx may be found
      in the range 0 - 10. Timing experiments, with small matrix
      dimensions, are recommended.

   o  Values for the parameters LNSZ, NPRT, and DP are obvious from the
      definitions (see section 3).

   o  PRTSZ should be assigned the largest number of cache lines that,
      in each partition, can be used to hold a local array containing a
      matrix block. The remaining cache lines may be occupied by
      scalars, vectors, and possibly program code depending on
      properties of the system. If the cache is shared for program
      instructions and data, a suitable value for PRTSZ may be the total
      number of cache lines in a partition minus one, or two, leaving
      one or two cache lines in each partition for vectors, scalars, and
      program code.

   o  LOLIM constitutes a lower limit for the size of the leading
      dimension that may be considered critical. A suitable value may be
      LOLIM = max( RCB, RB ), where RCB and RB are the block dimensions
      given for DSYRK, DTRMM, and DTRSM.

   The parameter values for internal block sizes and intersection points
   are adjusted separately for each routine. It may be rewarding to
   experiment with a range of different values for these parameters in
   order to optimize the performance.

   If you are unable to make the function DCLD safely predict which
   leading dimensions that will cause substantial performance
   degradation, you may consider rewriting DCLD so that the value .TRUE.
   is always returned for values greater than LOLIM. In this case, all
   leading dimensions greater than LOLIM are regarded as critical. The
   risk of severe performance degradation for the GEMM-Based routines
   becomes significantly reduced, at the small expense of copying of
   matrix blocks to local arrays a few more times.

   The GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS Benchmark can be used to fine-tune the
   user specified parameters for high performance. This benchmark is
   designed as a tool for evaluation of Level 3 BLAS kernel programs. It
   measures and compares the performance of a set of user specified
   Level 3 BLAS routines and a set of GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS routines
   included in the benchmark. The Level 3 routines specified by the user
   may, for instance, be routines in a vendor supplied highly optimized
   library. Another useful timing program, distributed with the original
   Level 3 BLAS [1],[2], can be obtained by sending the E-mail message
   'send dblas3time from blas' to netlib@ornl.gov.

   If you intend to really squeeze the maximum performance out of the
   GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS concept, you may consider replacing calls to
   auxiliary routines and Level 1 and Level 2 BLAS routines, with highly
   optimized inline Fortran 77 code, which often is done in vendor
   manufactured kernels in order to reduce the overhead.


   6. Example values for the user specified parameters

   The program DSGPM rewrites the GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS source files
   replacing lines containing old PARAMETER statements for user
   specified parameters, with lines containing new PARAMETER statements
   given in the input file. The user can conveniently assign new values
   to the PARAMETER statements in the input file, and then run DSGPM to
   distribute the values among the GEMM-Based routines. The enclosed
   files 'dsgpm.f' and 'dgpm.in' contain the program DSGPM and an
   example input file, respectively. Input files may consist of three
   different types of lines, apart from empty lines.

   o  Comment lines starting with the character '*'.

   o  Lines containing single filenames for GEMM-Based source files.

   o  Lines containing PARAMETER statements that replaces the
      corresponding lines in the GEMM-Based routines.

   A line containing a filename is followed by lines containing the new
   PARAMETER statements for the particular file (see the input file
   'dgpm.in' and the examples below).

   The values for the user specified parameters presented in this
   section have been used during the development of the GEMM-Based
   Level 3 BLAS model implementations. They are not thoroughly optimized
   for their respective machines and should merely be viewed as start-
   values for further refinement.



   Example 1.  IBM RS/6000 530H

      Machine characteristics:

      Separate caches for data and instructions.
      Data cache size               =  64 Kbyte.
      Cache line size               =  128 byte
      Cache scheme (mapping)        =  4-way associative.
      Size of a double word         =  8 bytes

      User specified parameters:

      dsymm.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 128, CB = 64 )
      dsyr2k.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 128, CB = 64 )
      dsyrk.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 64, RB = 64, CB = 64 )
      dtrmm.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 64, RB = 64, CB = 64 )
      dtrsm.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 64, RB = 64, CB = 64 )
      dbigp.f
            PARAMETER        ( DIP41 = 4, DIP42 = 3,
           $                   DIP81 = 4, DIP82 = 3, DIP83 = 4,
           $                   DIP91 = 4, DIP92 = 3, DIP93 = 4 )
      dcld.f
            PARAMETER        ( LNSZ = 128, NPRT = 128, PRTSZ = 3,
           $                   LOLIM = 128, DP = 8 )


   Example 2.  Alliant FX/2800, 1 processor

      Machine characteristics (Intel i860 processor):

      Separate caches for data and instructions.
      Data cache size               =  8 Kbyte.
      Cache line size               =  32 byte
      Data cache scheme (mapping)   =  2-way associative.
      Size of a double word         =  8 bytes

      User specified parameters:

      dsymm.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 128, CB = 32 )
      dsyr2k.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 128, CB = 32 )
      dsyrk.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 32, RB = 32, CB = 32 )
      dtrmm.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 32, RB = 32, CB = 32 )
      dtrsm.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 32, RB = 32, CB = 32 )
      dbigp.f
            PARAMETER        ( DIP41 = 3, DIP42 = 3,
           $                   DIP81 = 3, DIP82 = 3, DIP83 = 3,
           $                   DIP91 = 3, DIP92 = 3, DIP93 = 3 )
      dcld.f
            PARAMETER        ( LNSZ = 32, NPRT = 128, PRTSZ = 2,
           $                   LOLIM = 32, DP = 8 )


   Example 3.  IBM 3090J VF

      Machine characteristics (vector processor with vector registers):

      Shared cache for data and instructions.
      Vector register length (VSS)  =  256 words
      Cache size                    =  256 Kbyte.
      Cache line size               =  128 byte
      Cache scheme (mapping)        =  4-way associative.
      Size of a double word         =  8 bytes

      User specified parameters:

      dsymm.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 256, CB = 96 )
      dsyr2k.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 256, CB = 96 )
      dsyrk.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 144, RB = 256, CB = 96 )
      dtrmm.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 144, RB = 256, CB = 96 )
      dtrsm.f
            PARAMETER        ( RCB = 144, RB = 256, CB = 96 )
      dbigp.f
            PARAMETER        ( DIP41 = 4, DIP42 = 3,
           $                   DIP81 = 4, DIP82 = 3, DIP83 = 4,
           $                   DIP91 = 4, DIP92 = 3, DIP93 = 4 )
      dcld.f
            PARAMETER        ( LNSZ = 128, NPRT = 512, PRTSZ = 3,
           $                   LOLIM = 128, DP = 8 )


   7. Installing the programs

   This section describes how to install the GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS
   model implementations on a unix-like system. A 'Makefile' is enclosed
   to facilitate the installation.

   The user specified parameters come with default values. These values
   need to be optimized for different target machines according to the
   guidelines in section 5. Some experiments with different values may
   result in a remarkable increase in performance, and is therefore
   recommended.

   The enclosed program DSGPM together with an input file can be used
   to assign values to the user specified parameters (see section 6).
   Compile and link the program DSGPM:

      % make dsgpm

   Create a copy, 'newdgpm.in', of the enclosed input file 'dgpm.in'.
   Assign new values to the user specified parameters in 'newdgpm.in'
   (see the guidelines in section 5 and the examples in section 6).
   Run the program which rewrites the GEMM-Based routines with the
   new parameter values given in 'newdgpm.in':

      % dsgpm < newdgpm.in

   Decide whether you wish to create a complete Level 3 BLAS library,
   including the underlying BLAS routines, or a library with only the
   GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS routines, which need to be linked with the
   underlying BLAS at a later stage, when an executable program is
   created.

   For a complete library, assign the underlying BLAS (paths to
   routines, or to a library, containing the underlying BLAS) to the
   variable LIB12B in the file 'Makefile'. If you wish, you may specify
   a separate underlying DGEMM routine to the variable DGEMM. For a
   library containing only the GEMM-Based routines, do not specify any
   routines or libraries. You may also specify compiler flags in the file
   'Makefile'. Create a GEMM-Based Level 3 BLAS library:

       % make libgbl3b

   Hopefully, a library named libgbl3b.a is now created in the directory
   above the current directory.


   8. Verify the correctness of the installed programs

   Be sure to verify the correctness of the compiled routines
   thoroughly, before production use. Do not trust the underlying BLAS,
   or the compiler used, especially if compiler options for code
   optimization, inlineing, etc., were used. We recommend the test
   program DBLAT3 for verification of double-precision Level 3 BLAS.
   This program can be obtained from netlib by sending an e-mail
   containing the message 'send dblat3 from blas'. Apart from the block
   sizes you have selected for best performance, make some tests with
   small block dimensions. For example, different combinations of the
   values 3, 4, and 7 for the parameters RCB, RB, and CB, respectively.
   Matrix dimensions in the range 0-60 should be satisfactory. Include
   at least one test with dimensions larger than 30, to make sure that
   the block partitioning works correctly. For the scalars ALPHA and
   BETA use, for instance, the values 0.0, 1.0, -1.0, -0.8, and 1.2.
   Finally, notice that this code is free and comes with no guarantee.


   References

   [1] Dongarra J. J., DuCroz J., Duff I., and Hammarling S., "A Set of
       Level 3 Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms", ACM Trans. Math.
       Softw., Vol. 16, No. 1, 1990, pp.1-17.

   [2] Dongarra J. J., DuCroz J., Duff I., and Hammarling S., "Algorithm
       679: A Set of Level 3 Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms: Model
       Implementation and Test Programs", ACM Trans. Math. Softw.,
       Vol. 16, No. 1, 1990, pp.18-28.

   [3] Dongarra J. J., DuCroz J., Hammarling S., and Hanson R., "An
       Extended Set of Fortran Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms",
       ACM Trans. Math. Softw., Vol. 14, No. 1, 1988, pp.1-17.

   [4] Dongarra J. J., DuCroz J., Hammarling S., and Hanson R.,
       "Algorithm 656: An Extended Set of Basic Linear Algebra
       Subprograms: Model Implementation and Test Programs", ACM Trans.
       Math. Softw., Vol. 14, No. 1, 1988, pp.18-32.

   [5] Kagstrom B., Ling P., and Van Loan C. "High Performance GEMM-
       Based Level-3 BLAS: Sample Routines for Double Precision Real
       Data", in High Performance Computing II, Durand M. and
       El Dabaghi F., eds., Amsterdam, 1991, North-Holland, pp.269-281.

   [6] Kagstrom B., Ling P. and Van Loan C. "Portable High Performance
       GEMM-Based Level-3 BLAS, in R. F. Sincovec et al, eds., Parallel
       Processing for Scientific Computing, SIAM Publications, 1993.

   [7] Kagstrom B. and Van Loan C. "GEMM-Based Level-3 BLAS", Tech. rep.
       CTC91TR47, Department of Computer Science, Cornell University,
       Dec. 1989.
